Of course, I must not mention any names, however I will say one relatively
perhaps not the most popular but relatively popular carbonated drink in Croatia on
the decile has 34 g of sugar in England the same
drink in the United Kingdom has 18 that means twice as much sugar per decile and to my question
Why do they say because we didn't ask for it we like
sweets means they have the technological ability to adapt it It is up to us to
actually take care of our nation it is amazing how little
space is actually dedicated to the story of health and you are already for decades,
in fact, in health care, you chose to talk about health all those years and you dedicated yourself
to public health, how did you even come to that decision, so it's actually a combination of
various circumstances in your life, it's really been about 30 years since I started
working, and like most medical students, because you know, education goes towards
curative and not preventive medicine, that's what I wanted, and that's what I
really really wanted to be a surgeon, and Uh actually, I was
a research trainee for three years in surgery Uh, with professor Košuta and I worked on
a project surgical therapy of extreme obesity M interesting that I
actually started working with this problem of obesity And then I realized how
wide this problem of obesity is because it is not something that we at the university
in the 80s or early 90s actually studied or particularly
mentioned at that time it was quite difficult to be completely open to get
a specialization in surgery even though as it was wartime you could actually learn a lot from that
surgery until today I actually practice what
I learned at that time on surgery was quite difficult to get
a specialization it was quite difficult to get Uh to get surgery and somehow
the path took me to epidemiology I didn't really
understand what I was going into at that moment however our private trip was going
to Brussels Mhm M where we spent four years No so I'll say we both lived and worked
there I first completed a sufficiently high level of French and after that I went
to a two-year Master's degree Uh Masters in public health methodology and I
actually met you in Brussels at the ulb university Li and Brukel I understood the meaning of
health promotion from my mentor, Professor Pejt, and actually
complete public health , that
was my two-year encounter with public
health with prevention,
although I come from a country where
Andrija
Štampar is the father of prevention
. Hmmm, after returning
home, I actually want to start practicing and pushing some of
the knowledge I gained in Brussels to the Study because
I think you study to apply, not to learn so that you know something,
so that's what I would say is a combination of initially surgery related to surgical therapy of extreme
obesity
.
Supek and
Professor Sučić are Professor Košuta, so I actually got a comprehensive
model of some sort and some idea that obesity is actually a
comprehensive multi-sector problem, along with the education I had from that
master's degree upon returning to Zagreb, I said someone has to start dealing with that
topic, someone has to catch up with the fact that it's not an attractive topic,
let's be honest because because it's difficult, everyone thinks you're invading someone's private
life in it's very difficult to explain
that it's not about whether someone is handsome or not, it's about
aesthetics, in fact, none. There are no aesthetics. It's only about
a health problem and a health issue, which I think is classified according to the international
classification of diseases and classified as excessive body mass and fatness,
however, until today, it's pretty much unrecognized as a health problem.
Uh, if I can just say one more thing, I think it's May 3, 22, 2022.
a rather important date for all those who deal with
the problem of obesity in the world Mhm because that date was
the first time the World Health Organization defined obesity as a M complex chronic
multifactorial disease that actually underlies the entire spectrum of
chronic non-communicable diseases Mhm as a significant risk M until then
obesity was Uh combined with
Type 2 diabetes, so this is the first time that the world's health sector
has defined it as a separate health indicator, which I think is an unusually important
moment, but I say How does that take time to it comes to that How does
that moment actually reflect on here, you return to Croatia, you start
an action, one of them is to live healthy, which until today, Evo has made very
great strides in the form of awareness in general and some kind of
social topics Oh health and prevention, but what does this sort of dek
classification of obesity
actually reflect on preventive
programs
? if we stick to the classification,
there shouldn't be any problems, that is, we have the code e65, excessive
body mass, code e66, thickness. It is important to note that it is
registered and, if necessary, some treatment is carried out
, as for any other disease, but it is simply completely
unrecognized. I don't want to be too critical because I don't think there is any particular benefit from criticism
, but if we know that in Croatia from birth to the end of
life, according to all our precise research, we can
expect about 46 c3% throughout life people who have more kilos A in the system are
recognized around 0 cij three to receive a diagnosis in the sense that this means that we
have a serious problem and those 0 C3 is very likely, that is, it is extreme
thickness which then actually ends up in surgical treatment and one piece of data
like this It can be casual but I think it says a lot is that uh,
for example, 85% of people in Croatia with a common DV-type disease have more kilos
Mhm and we all know very well in medicine that there is actually a
pre-diabetes stage or a stage in by regulating your body weight, you do not enter
the diabetes phase at all and you actually
regulate your body weight and the level of glucose in your blood,
despite the fact that obesity prevention is not actually
invested in, and 12.8% of the
total
Croatian
health budget goes to the treatment of diabetes type DV and its complications
. this is an important moment that you referred to
M, because in fact the world health has made obesity a
separate indicator, which is in the majority of cases, so I hope that it will
be the same in this issue, the moment when something actually
starts to change in the health department, I like to joke, so I say how
in the 80s we waited for the film to come from America to China, so you know that it
came out there, but it will only be here in a month, now, in principle, some key things
are changing in the fight against obesity
and increased obesity whatever it is, the body mass is different, it's the degrees. In other words,
the problems are different, but the classifications are actually changing, the method of treatment is changing,
the first anti-obesity drug is approved, is that what they call it?
It's a bit like it's in contradiction with what public health
institutions or projects want to achieve, and that's prevention,
education, lifestyle changes. Because here I'm just thinking with common sense,
if there's an anti-obesity drug that prevents me from gaining weight, I'll take
the drug, and then everything will be fine, because I I think the price of the medicine prevents you
if you don't think. In fact, if you don't think in advance about preserving
your health, well, obesity is not only a problem, as we said, but actually M
raises the issue of longevity, health, functionality, yes, yes. So, I
think at this moment, it's not this moment, we've known this
since 2008, when the first serious major research came out, we know that it is
obesity is actually the only statistically significantly
recognized risk that underlies the five
leading chronic non-communicable diseases of the cardiovascular system, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, the already mentioned
diabetes mellitus, type two, some tumors and
mental problems, of these five diseases, currently in Croatia,
it dies and so on. How What year 92 to 90 improves and dies
? Again,
obesity is statistically significant, and by acting on obesity, you actually
affect eight obesity conditions, hypertension, dyslipidemia and
the five leading diseases in one fell swoop, i.e. developing excess weight means that by gaining weight,
you actually put yourself at risk for the remaining seven leading conditions in
Croatia, so no matter how you look at it, do you look at it from a personal perspective, if
there is, if there is some minimal education, let's say what we are doing today is
actually again a form of education, at least we are trying
to reach out. you get fat, you prevent diseases of the heart,
lung tract, some tumors, mental diseases, do you understand
type 2 diabetes because if we know at this moment that actually 2/3 of people in
Croatia who have a stroke Uh with a positive history of stroke
who have survived it are overweight if we know that 30% of people
with high blood pressure are overweight if we know that 85% of people with
type 2 diabetes are overweight, then maybe we should
think about how not to be overweight yes How to get there but
you mentioned an interesting sentence, which is that sometimes it seems that too much
is actually going into some personal freedoms when we actually explain to people how they
should live, because the improvement of lifestyle is actually sometimes towards
the prevention of obesity, which then makes you susceptible to some kind of
disease and difficulties, so how do we actually balance that
, do we abolish some freedoms, do we impose some choices and make it so that it is
something that people choose a healthy lifestyle? Have you ever come to
an answer to that question? in fact, on the subject
you mentioned, I don't see either abolition or imposition. Uh, I
actually see education as a prerequisite for the election, but I understand why the election doesn't
happen often, and now there is some kind of, I dare say, in my work for the last ten or 15
years, a keystone of encouragement or one of several, and that is the environment in
which we live, so Uh, we educate because a human being simply Well, I think if you don't know,
you ca n't even choose it, right?
start to choose a healthy lifestyle and that's your
right, however, if you want and most people if they become aware of the risks something carries, they will
most likely think to themselves, well, I'm going, I'll still choose not to be sick
Mhm Mhm, however, the environment in which we live is such that you don't actually have a
big choice Mhm yes, so what this whole project to live
healthy is quite different from most projects is that what we educate,
we try to make available because I think that the environment is
the key thing back in 2011, I'll paraphrase
what was published in the scientific to the lancet magazine, fatness is Uh fatness is
simply a normal response of a normal individual to an abnormally obesogenic
living environment in which he lives obesogenically obesogenic like obesity Mhm ii
look I mean that's actually it I can for example know everything in this world but
if I don't have anywhere to practice it what is the benefit to me if you come to
your workplace and the only thing there is a vending machine and you are a psychologist
you probably know much better than I do that there is a very negligible proportion of people who
at home prepare food here let's say I'm not one of them Mhm Mhm I am too
but I put a lot of effort into exactly that and I know how demanding it is that it's
really something that a small number of people will do most will come unprepared isn't
that right yes and then find your way yes and Very often it's the nearest bakeries or
it's that vending machine that has everything but healthy choices and inside it can be
healthy choice Mhm, it means it's not something
immutable, or for example if you come to
Primary school and it's one of those examples that bothers me so much, so
I went to research it, that's why we made those polygons, it means when entering
Primary school, it's all about us, I'll circle around 95% of the children are
physically active enough, 6 more minutes a day, which is not bad until primary school,
so it means somewhere around 95 children enter Primary school at the beginning, which is enough for us physically
active at the end of the day, we drop to some 13%, and we are talking about the end of
the elementary school within eight years, because I know that it is even more devastating for the middle school,
in
fact, it remains there until the age of 64, when the level of physical activity drops a little more,
what
does that mean, what happens in those eight years of elementary school education
? reduce means it's not an individual thing,
something completely systematic is happening Mhm and then actually through analysis you come to some
indicators that say that in fact a large number of schools I think we're talking about
over 20% of schools Uh that is a lot more schools but they are regional schools about 20%
of students have no place to practice physical activity and every behavior is a learned
behavior so even if we change that behavior in adulthood
then in fact we are already at a loss we already are but that is possible the good news is
that it was learned wrong once it is possible to change learned behavior into some kind
of well-learned behavior, but you actually teach these children a sedentary lifestyle in elementary school
,
and then when they start to develop chronic
non-communicable diseases, one of the first questions your doctor asks is do you move
enough,
so no, I don't move
enough.
sídilaška n Well, of course, yesterday I lamented this very thing
this morning with my husband while we were driving here.
I read somewhere how this relevant information became, and it's actually that
someone saw some kind of clip on Instagram or read something casually somewhere, as
if there is no more relevant information that we read, so let's gather some kind
of information
.
increase the level of physical activity of elementary
school children, where children actually today and when you put them in front of those scales
When they have to pass, say, what's on the floor, they are so confused and don't know
which foot to start with first, which tells us how much children are currently
turned
to
a sedentary lifestyle
. the thing that we
don't generally see as a full meal is yes, but it's something that
children will come across first, especially in absenteeism, let's say if the parents are
too busy, so they don't cook and it's difficult to cook and prepare food every day,
how can I solve this when I listen a little and if you add to that the lack of green
areas Where can people even move? Physically, I'm lucky,
I live near the maximum, but how many people have the luxury of going out and going into the forest
? It's great, how do you reconcile it all now? How did you
actually try to level it out a little through the project to live healthy? We still have some
optimism when we look at the future, we are at various levels. First of all, I would like
to say that Uh, the national program to
live healthy
started a long
time ago. Yes,
D. result, then I act on a larger number of people and not
only on one person means the Minister of Health at the time
vlahušić said so he was somehow I would dare to say a little
ahead of who's time means he was Uh 2008 the first report of the world
health organization on the subject of obesity came out which I already mentioned and minister
Vlahužić said back in 2002 we must invest in prevention He was otherwise
very public health oriented we must invest in
prevention and I think we should start with the problem of obesity because
obesity is a risk for many other conditions otherwise he was an endocrinologist so
he was probably also aware of the situation with diabetes and founded a
committee to promote proper nutrition and physical activity and we
met for the first time, there were 12 of us and we met for the first time in October
2002 and on May 10,
next year's World Movement Day, in 2003 we organized the Breakfast on the Grass M campaign in four Croatian cities Zagreb
Rijeka Split Osijek where we actually promoted
walking as, dare I say it, the form of activity that is the most common available to people,
it is the least financially demanding and in fact now it is shown to
be the healthiest. When we actually look at longevity, it is a big topic even
wider than obesity, but it turns out that just half an hour of brisk walking
is enough to maintain
your health. You
don't need any equipment, you don't really need any money.
is but we can have
a cumulative effect 10 minutes 15 minutes it is not that difficult to accumulate in a day but
we easily forget even that in all these cars and transports that are
available to us Uh and so we started with this action of walking and presenting
breakfast as actually a healthy lifestyle habit along with breakfast and walking or
movement our poster at that moment was an old lady walking and
a young mountain climber next to her and the message was that
everyone in their own way should actually choose what makes a person happy
what is feasible for him and what makes him happy what we promote is walking as
a kind of movement that is the most accessible to most people, it is also good for rehabilitation
and so on and so on, we also talked about food, meaning proper nutrition and something
that maybe the most received eight glasses of water a day mm because actually hydration is
unusually important and people like concrete guidelines what when we say
walking it is very broad The spectrum is what How where in what but this eight glasses
of water eight glasses of water Yes but 30 minutes of walking a day is 30 minutes is more difficult
than eight glasses of water, but we need to get moving because we are lulled and actually
it is easier for us to sit somewhere, that is our comfort zone, that is,
we translate it wrongly, we say comfort zone. And we should say comfort zone.
Where we feel comfortable, we know these patterns, we know how to sit in front of
the TV after work, especially if we are tired, so
we will still say that to her.
and most often it won't be carrots or some green salad, and for
that green salad you have to wash it again, you have to prepare something, what is it,
you open the bag and the smell of chips scares you, let's say how
difficult is change in general, so both on a personal and social level when we talk about that
change and getting out of the comfort zone from the zone of the known, and you mentioned that the mental
aspect is very important, you also have psychologists in the team,
what is your impression, how difficult is it actually to make some kind of
social changes? that every change is every process of transition is
actually difficult, people don't like change, people like the goal that will be reached by that
change , but change as such is actually not something that people like to avoid,
because we all love each other, we all feel much more comfortable in our own well-established
patterns,
and there is one problem in a series of problems, why why is it so
difficult to make a change related to this issue of obesity
? to exercise and
so on, however, behavior is learned and as we are actually that some innate
we managed to suppress the urge to move during elementary school, because let's be realistic,
we systematically managed to suppress it and reduce that movement to a lower level,
so we can start it again even at an older age, we don't have to. We don't
have to be afraid of what age we are. Uh, they say that you will
know better, but they say that one six months is needed to adopt a new life
habit at least, but there is even talk about starting
changes, even in order for certain patterns to be considered adopted, we are talking about much more than
six months Yes A is advertised for 21 days, listen, these are instant solutions because
today people love everything through instant solutions and that's why actually what
this whole project is working on is that there are of course psychologists inside because this is
a comprehensive comprehensive program just to briefly go back to that means after
2003 we started Uh to work in five inter-resource groups and by 2015
those five inter-resource groups actually produced five basic key
areas of action so to speak of the project to live healthy we deal with comprehensive
health, which includes physical health, in fact, through the prevention of
excess body weight and obesity, the preservation of mental health and sexual
health, but you see, we deal with health, we actually try and our
job is actually to preserve health Mhm means investing in something that you basically get
at birth, mostly as a gift, most of us are born
healthy whenever someone congratulates someone on their birthday or new year or Christmas, whatever it
is that is healthy first of all, right
? no, I'm pretty sure,
uh, that a negligible number of people have ever gone to a doctor and said good
morning, I'm a completely healthy person, now you help me to stay healthy,
that means we basically start thinking about health the moment we lose it. And
my task is to talk about health and investing in health, because that
's where
I think
I should start for each individual .
treatment and there is no financial burden on society, and I always say that
investment in health is something that should first of all be recognized by the Minister
of Finance, because once the Minister of Finance recognizes investment in health
as something that the state or government should work on, then a whole
series of wheels will be set in motion Mhm, from a personal point of view it is the best
choice to invest in health, however, from the point of view of those who lead the state, investing in health is actually
much more profitable than investing in the treatment of diseases,
diseases should be treated immediately so that no one thinks, however, part of the funds should also
be transferred to prevention, or even in the promotion of health in
the preservation of what we actually receive as a gift, that is Štamparov's health is
more than the absence of disease and as you said yourself, I think he started
the story of prevention we have and Franja Bučar have so I think that
Croatia is literally a nursery of ideas even when we look at the past relevant ideas for
health longevity yes but look I think absolutely I keep coming back
to that now live healthy because I think we have too little time
I could but I want to tell you and then tell you adopted that
live healthy Mhm program as a continuous national program
of promoting healthy it will last I hope forever Mhm Uh however the problem
is in the financing we keep coming back to
the financing So we applied for part of these activities as a project to
the European Social Fund and drew funds for a six-year period and
now we will for the next six-year period which starts in a few
months and which is actually this same project of comprehensive health preservation
in certain vulnerable groups has one nice dash that maybe
our listeners don't know but it is that your project or
your team's project to live healthy has actually generated a small stamp, so you can
find a label to live healthy on some kind of food product and then
we can actually be sure that someone has checked it and is behind it really
that's a healthy choice in the diet, which I think is interesting. I
actually discovered it while studying your work, and then I just remembered that
I have those products at home and I was happy like here someone stands, some authority
is not that. I heard somewhere, I read somewhere, but some authority stands behind
it and says to me, I made a good choice today. That's one of the five
elements that we have, we have health education. Uh, let's say
this issue, the question of physical activity, that is, inactivity
. yes, no, which do not have a gym. How did the main ones first
equip 120 main ones and then 1000 regional ones
with polygons for physical activity, and so now that we don't go into
details, it is actually a prerequisite for physical activity, i.e.
a curriculum guaranteed by the tzk physical and
health culture, which is the creation of an environment like we did in each
county means Uh one one walking path means We
equipped each county with one walking
path and you have certain devices, you also have a device for people with disabilities,
you also have a place for bicycles, and you have
something that I am particularly proud of on the walking path, which is the breastfeeding bench,
because we always try, you know, to get something through something equally, in
every county we did that, that is, we arranged it according to a very similar principle with
health messages, and one park where, during the financing, we had
paid activity leaders both on the path and in the park, we can't
do that now, we donated it to the counties and now it's up to the individual counties if they want
to continue to invest continue to invest according to the pattern or not because imposition is not
that we already said at the beginning imposition is not an option because I need that is My team
should offer some kind of idea offer some kind of solution but you see that all
solutions will come to us otherwise I will come to the guaranteed alive that all solutions go towards making
available to us what we educate creating an environment in which you actually
have the opportunity to consume that acquired knowledge That's right but something also depends on personal responsibility
at the end of course but also something on systemic responsibility like this
with schools and physical activity Now the guarantee mark is something that will be
a small problem for me when we talk about the whole project is that it is very much rewarded
Uh you know that maybe you are recognized abroad before at home so the European
Commission has already awarded two of us twice and the first time they awarded us for a multi-sector
method of financing because if you and us are like that
65% of adults and 35% even a little more children are overweight then it is clear
to you and to me and to everyone that it is not the department of health anymore and it is a department full of many things that
belongs It is already a question for many departments and for the whole government, from
the Minister of Finance to Urbanism, Construction, Agriculture and so on.
Now you can't reduce it all to the Department of Health, and then most often when it's
the work of more than one
department, everyone from that department
disagrees. Nobody likes to invest in someone else's
department. and in fact, based on that example, they are now
financing further multi-sector projects, we
received the second prize as an example of
good practice for our training grounds, which were recognized by both
the World Health Organization and the European Commission as an example of good practice and
recommended to other countries, especially those with a worse standard, to
apply them, because I think it costs much less than 1000 EUR, and I think the construction of one
hall costs, I don't think it's comparable at all, anymore, I don't say that it's
a replacement, but it's a good intermediate, and now I'm getting to that guaranteed Žik, that means at
the time of applying for that project in fact, all countries in Europe had their own
product labeling model Mhm It's really not up to me to advertise someone else's, but
it's very likely that everyone recognizes it at this moment and the whole of France is lobbying
for it, the French mark Nutriskor Mhm abcd Mhm
Uh I'm not lobbying for Nutriskor because I think it favors the big
manufacturers, but when we were applying for the project, don't you think that
that's why I pointed it out Mhm When we were applying for the project we said OK so we
don't have any guarantee mark in Croatia Let's go and make a guarantee mark ž
however no one pressured us because they didn't even know that we produce a
guarantee mark but they are really experts I'm not one of those experts I'm just
leading that segment Uh we made Uh according to the rules of the service Uh everything without any
pressure from anyone and so now we have nine categories
of products where in fact some bad choices cannot apply at all Mhm for example
some popular sweetened [ __ ] I don't think you have the possibility to apply at all and the
same [ __ ] have according to the same Nutri score in the already mentioned label very good
I would say B means Uh We don't go mathematically but
we have like the whole project We have this kind of common that comprehensive approach
to preserving health and so a very very
interesting story first we entered M among the eight selected signs in the scientific
community and we were described in the nutrient magazine then we entered the four
selected signs in the European Union and at the end this is really believe it or not
the guarantee mark with the Nutri score became one of the two chosen in the European Union, one of which
will become a mandatory mark Now that the whole country is lobbying France for
its mark And we are very small m I'm not saying that we have a great chance Mhm M
there to become a mandatory mark but this is already a very very pleasant and nice
news and especially after the presentation of both marks together in
the parliament Mhm Uh it happened that certain larger countries vetoed
the French mark and supported living healthy Bravo II now nutrkor has actually
done you some changes in my
model I would dare to say based on what we did and
our idea was actually that we do not mark anyone as bad but only
with our green bubble and in fact that in a certain category of foods you can
have five butters that have a healthy life if they have met the highest
standards and when you come as a consumer you don't have to have time nor do you have to
have glasses because I don't know who can read those declarations so who can I don't
know who can young people who are still like this St possible and this if and you can
read Why should you need to know Why should you have specific
knowledge to understand what is written inside according to that The idea was that someone
expert actually reads for you when you come to the store and that you
have a choice at a glance OK in this category of products all are healthy
otherwise they would not be on the shelf but the highest nutritional criteria is met by that one
and that sign means that it is a matter of choice not imposition but a matter of choice in order for
them to choose we need to educate you I think some kind of education is needed but on
the other hand the idea was and that's what we actually started
in to a lesser extent, I can't say that we've come far, but you can't do
too much at the same time, because only
products
that
have a guarantee mark to live a healthy life
enter the vending machines.
Hmmm,
what would that lead to? maybe I can't
say on their behalf, but I know that they can reformulate the product to be
able to get into those vending machines, and that's some kind of I would say a good way to
act, Uh, I have one reference to that, so age, I'll mention it again now, and
it's not that now I think everything is better or, as they say, everything is getting bigger in the text, but
they have, they have numbers, and that's one interesting thing actually, Uh, measuring
things and showing them numerically, which again, as scientists, gives you a path, some where to
start, but OK, that's another topic, maybe for someone else conversation, well, those
are the indicators that we must have, the indicator is now actually in a situation
where they have put this anti-obesity drug into widespread use and not all
people can actually get it because there are too few of it at the moment considering
their numbers and the population of overweight people, but those who are now using it regularly
have started to make healthier choices in their diet, that's interesting, they don't have
one thing pulls the other, it's always like that in life, so what actually brings
food production
to a situation where they have to start producing healthier foods
if they want to keep the same audience Mhm what is this what you're talking about actually and
you can see it takes a lot of years to actually get there there are a lot of failures and
good attempts but in fact we're getting to the point that the system will build itself in
some kind of better direction if we let it no one will be at a loss that
although I'm more inclined to not do it at all let's bring it to a state Uh when we need
medicine and you know I think everyone should have the same opportunity obesity is just
like all other diseases today or conditions whatever you want it is socially determined
M Mhm and today it is known that in the lower social categories of people with a lower
formal education income we can talk about them but with a lower formal
education we have significantly more overweight people than in people with a higher
education it is also more frequent in men than in women for example in Croatia
it is significantly more frequent in boys even in adult men and now
such drugs are really expensive M they will be in some countries they already are
actually in some countries on prescription but really for extreme cases it means it
is not something that is widely available to people from all social categories
Mhm which is again in some way discriminatory you know that so
I am much much more inclined to go for the principle of egalitarianism and we can
achieve this exclusively by taking care of our health and warning that we do not
bring ourselves to the situation
we are in We have equipped schools with polygons. You can practice with polygons and
the children really like to practice on them. Even 96% of the students say they enjoy it because it's fun
and they
play. Over 70% of the teachers are completely
satisfied
with the use of those polygons
.
now we realized
that the population is the most important to us at the moment chefs and we started
educating chefs in schools and that's interesting you can connect to say
netflix and immediately you know how they work then Gordon ramse or jy actually
this jjie Oliver He went to English schools Oliver is but he also
experienced failure as successful and popular so yes because but
look and failures are in a way successes because they also start to talk
talk like that Yes so every evil is for some good l' but it seems that we as
Croats have been quite unsuccessful lately in terms of maintaining that line, l' and
this one. Is it really true that we are at the top of the list of the most obese nationals Uh Well,
I think we are how we got to that.
I'm looking at
pictures the other day
. and
conscious and everything, but today it's hard for me to maintain a line and I walk and train and
eat healthy, and yet somehow I have the feeling that people used
to connect something differently, now I'll actually answer you
Uh, the way the psychologist Professor Skinner wrote 74 years ago in his,
for me, the best-known work on behaviorism, where he said that if it
was pure mathematics, you take in more than you spend,
and if we only answered to our physiological support, hunger, we wouldn't have
a problem with problems, it means it works is actually about everything except the response to hunger
to the physiological support that we have. And that's all these
social pressures. Mhm, it means we always have to be realistic. Wherever
you go, you have to. If you're celebrating, you eat. If you're mourning, you eat. It's an incredible
pressure on a person to eat.
If you come somewhere and say you're going to have
a salad, I mean, or water, they ask you if you're okay.
the individual and the cult of feeding plus this, everything you said, the feeling of comfort,
the sedentary lifestyle, one thing leads to the other, everything is more comfortable for you, on
the one hand, and it's harder and harder for
you to change that habit, and
that 's
actually
how we are
now. by body mass and thickness
means we hold the first place in both men and women. About 65% of
adult people in Croatia
are overweight as far as children are concerned,
and the situation is very
bad. In fact, I
am leading
the research.
everything
is worse because we are not better, unlike some other countries, Mhm, we have reduced
that problem, so our problem is mostly on the same level as us, 36% of children
at the age of eight are overweight, about 12% of their parents
recognize that it is better than doctors,
a smaller number of doctors may recognize it but do not register it, and do not react that
you said a huge disparity, in fact extremely
large, it is on the total population Yes, it is on the total population, but it is not
important for us to get sick in children because people do not arrive, they simply deal with
diseases, and I think the whole system should be directed a little bit towards
prevention and health preservation, both financially and in fact then mentally, so that
they would in fact erect doctors from curative treatment of diseases
Uh what is somewhere around every third child means in Croatia they have more
weight, while the average for Europe is every fourth means both children and
adults are above the European average, so now this is
something interesting for children, if you forgive Uh so Uh since I have been participating in the goat
research that is since 2015, every wave of that research M first five
countries are Mediterranean countries, there is a gradient that is
quite pronounced, where Mediterraneans are the fattest children, especially
especially male children, this does not make any sense now, considering that
the Mediterranean diet has always, and the process of westernization has also come to the islands, how come
they no longer practice the Mediterranean, that people eat fish, this really does not make
any sense, that is that it is really devastating that here I am reading the other
day, a kilo of sardines 5 EUR lovost has finished a kilo of sardines sardines 5 EUR, realistically speaking
from a kilo sardines can be fed to a large number of people, isn't it,
with some kind of salad, let's say greens, so I think it's a wonderful meal Mhm a kilo
of sardines is cheaper than pizza [music]
Mhm but whose choice is it I'm not saying that plain water is certainly
cheaper than salty drinks I wanted to ask you is it healthy in
Croatia it's healthy so yes maybe it offends me a little when
they offer me bottled water near Uh I'm looking for the same I'm looking for the same yes yes
how are you a bit more strange no no so I see that they are not
particularly happy but they don't complain that it didn't even fall on the fruit on the ground yes
M so we have that situation now What is it like M I believe that sometimes the numbers
may seem worse to us than the actual situation around us but
you mentioned on several occasions that environment from the possibility of choosing Uh
foods to the availability of some kind of quick solutions in the diet but it's not always a matter of
diet and food in general there is also something in that How much do we actually
drink alcoholic [ __ ] carbonated [ __ ] sugared [ __ ] which somehow here is my
experience in working with people who are struggling with excess body weight as if
they are not aware enough that calories are the source of a large number of calories
in fact which are little and difficult to deal with Is there some kind of social pressure
that you once tried to deal with in the way Uh come into a skirmish with it or
do you still stick to this part of diet and physical activity so no I get
into challenging situations that's for sure this issue with alcohol is one
a serious question that actually goes beyond my work and
what are there people who are focused on Uh fun with that topic, however
I actually entered into this issue with carbonated drinks mm because it is one of the biggest
sources of hidden calories for both children and
adults M what is interesting m for example I also entered for energy [ __ ]
in certain challenging situations and here I must say that my team was very
successful because in the research we came across the information that 3% of elementary schools
sell energy drinks in schools and that is incredible managed
to remove from schools, but now let's go back to calories. So, of course,
I must not mention any names, however, I will say one relatively, perhaps not
the most popular, but relatively popular carbonated drink in Croatia per deciliter
has 34 g of sugar, and in England, the same
drink in the United Kingdom has
18, which means it
has twice as much sugar per deciliter, and to my question
. I
can't guide you about everything, but I can raise some questions. Here, I'm going to open a question in this
way. Let's ask for carbonated drinks, of course,
it
would be best to avoid them, but it's clear to you and me that it
's not too realistic
. ate
sugar for the coffee,
the coffee was very likely without sugar because we take care of ourselves on the line,
but that's why we took 10 bags of sugar through that drink,
now it's a matter of choice, do you need those 10 bags of sugar at that moment or
not, I would say that you don't need it, but if you already take them, then know that you
had one high-calorie meal at least so accurately that maybe yes and you need to run for
the tram and that you need to skip the whole lunch because you just
your glycemic index will jump and you'll
be hungry again very soon and so on and so on. We talked about social
responsibility, that is, society's responsibility towards the individual, about a kind of
personal responsibility for choosing, but about society's responsibility towards its own
budget and society's responsibility. Before that, it's something that I think that if
it would break through, that would be a turning point, so ultimately the whole
health promotion started in Canada. When the then Minister Lalond, who
was the Minister of Finance, recognized investing in health as economically
profitable the future, but we haven't touched on one responsibility that
we also like to pass by, and that is the responsibility of parents towards their children,
the responsibility of parents for their own health, first of all, because we are
their role model. We are their model by which they learn all manner of things. What
is special about you? Proud when we talk about your role as a parent,
you have two beautiful sons . Well,
they are already adults. They are
already adults.
influence the situation a bit so that there is more health and that
there are not 35% of obese children, but let's reduce it a bit, normalize it, so
look, I think first of all, I want to say that I am a bit protective towards
parents, so maybe you won't get the answer you expected, you don't know
what I am, because your question meant that
I should now say that it is a big responsibility, of course it is a big
responsibility of the parents, but as a parent, I can't because of the
peer pressure and what they are, the environment is like that, we mentioned
Professor Skinner Mhm Uh and we were saying we are talking about not only responding to
the physiological stimulus of hunger, but parents can do a lot of things,
it is almost unbelievable
that I think most of their life
knowledge is already adopted by the child between the sixth
month and the second year of life.
then it's still like that, which means that in fact the child
watches his parents all the time, records his parents, and actually at that youngest
age, we are a model of behavior for our children, not only what
we tell them they need, but how we live, so I think it's our
responsibility as parents, Uh, to show how it should be
and to create some again, who, what about the home environment, how
it should look like, I think people already know some of the tricks that I had,
maybe, maybe here's an anecdote I'll tell you, Why not, then at we
don't have so-called snack trays at home, we just don't have it, everyone
took a breath, you know, there's no tray at your place, we don't have anything good, which doesn't mean
that it's forbidden, no
, it's not forbidden, I mean, but we just don't have it, so when they are children, let's say, now they eat this or
that, no problem, but you have to put on
your shoes and go out to get the good stuff,
and that's very discouraging. we
never have anything on the table to snack on, let's say it's like that,
another thing is that we don't have anything except water, there's no juice,
there's nothing at all, these carbonated drinks for 35 gr, there's nothing, and now uh, now that doesn't
mean it's forbidden Mhm I always say, I mean, let's say we all know the same
thing about a drink that when a child has a stomach ache or when we're adults have a stomach ache
in small sips, but I'll note in small sips, it will mostly
regulate that problem well, I remember exactly two situations Uh, at one o'clock my son
went to his birthday party and he said that he drank a few glasses of that drink, I say
why, I was at a birthday party and my stomach hurt so bad, so I say, well,
it's not forbidden for you, so you can do it otherwise, but it's not something you drink
instead of water, yes, or the situation in which my older son, who is now 27
years old, asked me, listen, are
we really that poor
? I say, Why? it has nothing to do with that, even though it is of course much
cheaper to drink water, but it has to do with some kind of choice and some kind of
education so that we parents have responsibility Uh by our own
example actually first of all by our own example we show that there are some
little cookies these are mine Mhm so if I can be of help
Why not And let's say I never brought anything to the playground yes yes yes
means we went on a long trip yes yes yes you will survive two hours my sister
I always wondered to the mothers who take out those bags and then take out this bag, it's not
even sandwiches, we were just kidding, I'm just waiting for the sandwich to be taken out, but I agree
with you, never anything if you really need to bring something, so I think a banana is
the best, the best choice, the child can have dirty hands Mhm, that means you don't have to
peel it Prat You don't have to touch it, a little potassium is not bad for
the heart so here If you really have to bring something, water and a banana, don't
you think it's good like a cake, but it's actually not bad to hear a little about how others deal with
This is how I coped with the pressures, and you know relatively. I think there
wasn't any kind of discussion. Everything can be damaged like this. Only we don't have that at home, and now
I think if you want to go out nicely, I'm wondering if they
have drawers, so-called drawers, and they don't
. That's interesting.
It's a learned behavior.
Yes, they don't. snacks something and our children
the same I guess they picked it up somewhere I like to think so they live in that
environment we have an extract but no it is not used no but
I have I had a good you are better than us and well we are two psychologists
Maybe we are few somewhere possible you are better because I think this is a temptation you know
what you have and you don't touch it so let's let them into society The same will be surrounded by reason he doesn't
have to drink four glasses when he goes to his birthday his stomach hurts so his
stomach hurts when we talk about the future Is there any other action project something
that you may have wanted to upgrade to these existing what what now We see on
to some kind of list of yours Uh so we actually continue with what we are doing
Uh without imposing it it is very important to us we offered a solution however
if there is no demand for it you cannot impose it nor should you in my
opinion However what I said now we are moving towards vulnerable groups Mhm means
preserving health full health I am talking about Uh and not only obesity but also
mental health we have a program help where we actually
turned to the teachers Mhm Uh because according to our
research the teachers actually really wanted to provide first aid in some cases depressive
episodes And we know that the problem is quite big and however they said that
they are not capacitated so that we actually educate and continue,
please tell us just here in the second sentence it is very important to convey that
information Uh you have very systematic educations that are very comprehensive
we have systematic educations of educational workers where
we actually teach them to recognize M depressive episodes and to provide first
aid and know how to refer children further I can apply if I saw it correctly
that I can apply it is to the project to live healthy it leads professor
of psychology professor Musić yes it's very important to convey these messages and
here we are on the subject of messages M What would be your final message at least
within this conversation of ours with which you might want to send the word
information I won't say appeal it sounds a bit too much for this February already
boring and gray gray but maybe something inspiring for people watching
this conversation of ours Uh here's from you heart heart from your heart to our crazy Uh Well I've
actually already incorporated my message into everything we've said so I'll just sort of
summarize it Uh, most of us are given health as
a gift at birth and I think we should do everything we can to
preserve that health throughout our lives and to think about it in time so we don't
lose it because it's harder to get it back than to preserve it
m should enjoy life but like everything be moderate in eating and drinking and in
physical activity because even excessive physical activity is not the healthiest
choice so M take care of your health be moderate and
enjoy Thank you very much for your time and for this wonderful conversation and for what you are
shared so much information with us, I'm sure that we will somehow manage
to use it, so that if we don't change our destiny and life, at least
enrich it for one day, thank you very much, thank you for the invitation